XXX At that time Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva in consideration of future generations made this request again of th
e Blessed One: Pray tell me, Blessed One, about the perfecting of the discipline whereby the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas bec
ome great Yogins.The Blessed One replied: There are four things, Mahāmati, by fulfilling which the Bodhisattvas become g
reat Yogins.What are the four? They are: (1) To have a clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself,1 (2) to di
scard the notions of birth, (80) abiding, and disappearance, (3) to look into [the truth] that no external world obtains
, and (4) to seek for the attainment of inner realisation by noble wisdom.Provided with these four things the Bodhisattv
a-Mahāsattvas become great Yogins.

How, Mahāmati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva come to have a clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind itself?He co
mes to it by recognising that this triple world is nothing but Mind itself, devoid of an ego and its belongings, with no
strivings, no comings-and-goings; that this triple world is manifested and imagined as real, under the influence of the
habit-energy accumulated since beginningless time by false reasoning and imagination, and with the multiplicity of obje
cts and actions in close relationship, and in conformity with the ideas of discrimination, such as body, property, and a
bode.Thus, Mahāmati, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva acquires a thoroughly clear understanding as to what is seen of Mind its
elf.

How again, Mahāmati, does the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva discard notions of birth, abiding, and disappearance?By this it is m
eant that all things are to be regarded as forms born of a vision or a dream and have never been created since there are
no such things as self, the other, or bothness.[The Bodhisattvas] will see that the external world exists only in confo
rmity with Mind-only; and seeing that there is no stirring of the Vijñānas and that the triple world is a complicated ne
twork of causation and owes its rise to discrimination, (81) they find that all things, inner and external, are beyond p
redicability, that there is nothing to be seen as self-nature, and that [the world] is not to be viewed as born; and the
reby they will conform themselves to the insight that things are of the nature of a vision, etc., and attain to the reco
gnition that things are unborn.Establishing themselves on the eighth stage of Bodhisattvahood, they will experience a re
vulsion [in their consciousness] by transcending the Citta, Manas, and Manovijñāna, and the five Dharmas, and the [three
] Svabhāvas, and the twofold Egolessness, and thereby attain the mind-made body (Manomayakāya).

Thus, Mahāmati, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva will discard the notion of birth, abiding, and disappearance.2 Said Mahāmati,3
what is meant by the will-body, Blessed One?The Blessed One replied: It means that one [in this body] can speedily move
unobstructed as he wills; hence the will-body, Mahāmati.For instance, Mahāmati, the will [or mind] travels unobstructed
over mountains, walls, rivers, trees, etc., many a hundred thousand yojanas they may be away, when a man recollects the
scenes which had previously come into his perception, while his own mind keeps on functioning in his body without the l
east interruption or hindrance.In the same fashion, Mahāmati, the will-body, in the attainment of the Samādhi called Māy
ā-like and adorned with such marks as the powers, the psychic faculties, and the self-control, will be born in the noble
paths and assemblies, moving about as freely as he wishes, as he recalls his original vows and worlds in order to bring
all beings to maturity.4

Then, Mahāmati, what is meant by the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva (82) having a good insight into the non-existence of external
objects?It means, Mahāmati, that all things are like unto a mirage, a dream, a hair-net;and seeing that all things are 
here essentially because of our attachment to the habit-energy of discrimination which has been maturing since beginning
less time on account of false imagination and erroneous speculation, the Bodhisattvas will seek after the attainment of 
self-realisation by their noble wisdom.Mahāmati, furnished with these four things, Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas become great 
Yogins.Therefore, in these, Mahāmati, you should exercise yourself.

