What are the five? They are: (1) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Śrāvaka-vehicle; (2) the group of peopl
e whose insight belongs to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle; (3) the group of people whose insight belongs to the Tathāgata-ve
hicle; (4) the group of indefinite character; and (5) the group of people to whom no insight is possible.Mahāmati, how d
oes one know the group of people whose insight belongs to the Śrāvaka vehicle? There are people the hair of whose body w
ill stand on end when they know and realise the nature of the Skandhas, Dhātus, Āyatanas, and [what is meant by] general
ity and individuality;their intellect will leap with joy on knowing and practising what belongs to appearance and not on
practising what they know of the uninterrupted chain of causation, —such ones, Mahāmati, are said to be of the group wh
ose insight belongs to the Śrāvaka vehicle.Having had an insight into their own vehicle, they abide at the fifth or the 
sixth stage where they do away with the rising of the passions, but not with the habit-energy; they have not yet passed 
beyond the inconceivable transformation-death, and their lion-roar is, “My life is destroyed, my morality is established
, etc."; they will then discipline themselves in the egolessness of persons and finally gain the knowledge of Nirvāṇa.Ag
ain, Mahāmati, there are others who, believing in such things as ego, being, vital principle, nourisher, supreme spirit,
or personal soul, will seek Nirvāṇa in them.

Again, Mahāmati, there are still others who, seeing that all things exist by depending upon causes, will recognise in thi
s the way to Nirvāṇa.(64) But, Mahāmati, as they have no insight into the egolessness of things, there is no emancipatio
n for them.This, Mahāmati, is where those of the Śrāvaka-vehicle and the philosophers make the mistake in their insight 
by regarding non-deliverance as deliverance.Therefore, Mahāmati, you ought to discipline yourself in order to escape thi
s wrong view.Now, Mahāmati, they belong to the group of the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle who will shed tears and feel the hair
of their body stand on end when the Pratyekabuddha's insight is shown to them.

When the teaching to keep themselves away from social relations and entanglements, not to become attached to the external
world and its manifold form, to perform miraculous powers by which they can divide their own body and appear double or 
perform the transformations, is disclosed to them, they are thereby entreated.Recognising that they are of the group who
se insight belong to the Pratyekabuddha-vehicle, their discourses will be in conformity with the insight of the Pratyeka
buddha-vehicle.This, Mahāmati, is the characteristic feature of the group of people whose insight belongs to the Pratyek
abuddha-vehicle.Now, Mahāmati, three aspects are distinguishable in the insight belonging to the group of the Tathāgata-
vehicle.

They are: (1) an insight whereby one sees into the self-nature of things, which is no self-nature; (2) an exalted insight
which is the attainment of self-realisation; and (3) an insight into the immensity of the external Buddha-lands.When, M
ahāmati, these three aspects are disclosed one after another and also when the inconceivable realm of the Ālayavijñāna i
s disclosed, where body, property, and abode are seen to be the manifestation of Mind itself, a man will not be frighten
ed, nor terrified, nor show any sign of fear; then such a one is to be known as of the group of people whose insight bel
ongs to the Tathāgata-vehicle.This is, (65) Mahāmati, the characteristic feature of the insight of those who belong to t
he Tathāgata-vehicle.Again, Mahāmati, when these three forms of insight are disclosed to a man, he may thereby be pursua
ded to discipline himself in them.

This, Mahāmati, is the stage of preparation for the establishment of his own group.In order that he may go up to the stag
e of imagelessness, there is this establishment.But the Śrāvaka who will purify his own habit-energy of passions by atta
ining an inner perception into the Ālaya and by seeing into the egolessness of things, will settle himself in the bliss 
of the Samādhi and finally will attain the body of Tathāgatahood.1XXI Then the Blessed One recited these verses:130 The 
fruit of the Stream-entered, and that of the Once-to-come; the fruit of the Not-to-come and Arhatship— all these are due
to mental perturbation.

