According to the Blessed One's teaching, the eternal-unthinkable is the exalted condition of self-realisation and also of
highest reality.Now, do not the philosophers also talk about the creative agent being the eternal-unthinkable?The Bless
ed One replied: No, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable considered by the philosophers to be characteristic of their creat
or is untenable.Why? Because, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable as held by the philosophers is not in conformity with th
e idea of a cause itself.When, Mahāmati, this eternal-unthinkable is not in conformity with the idea of a cause itself h
ow can this be proved tenable?(60) Again, Mahāmati, if what is claimed to be the eternal-unthinkable is in conformity wi
th the idea of a cause [which is eternal] in itself, it can be eternal; but since the idea of a creator is based upon th
at of a [further] cause, it cannot be the eternal-unthinkable.But, Mahāmati, my highest reality is the eternal-unthinkab
le since it conforms to the idea of a cause and is beyond existence and non-existence.Because it is the exalted state of
self-realisation it has its own character; because it is the cause of the highest reality it has its causation; because
it has nothing to do with existence and non-existence it is no doer; because it is to be classed under the same head as
space, Nirvāṇa, and cessation it is eternal.Therefore, Mahāmati, it is not the same as the eternal-unthinkable of the p
hilosophers;the eternal-unthinkable of the Tathāgatas is thatness realised by noble wisdom within themselves.For this re
ason, Mahāmati, let the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva discipline himself in order to attain by means of noble wisdom the truth 
of self-realisation which is the eternal-unthinkable.Again, further, Mahāmati, the eternal-unthinkable of the philosophe
rs is not characterised with eternality because it has a cause which is not eternal;

what they regard as eternal is not eternal as it is not characterised with the power that can create itself.If again, Mah
āmati, the philosophers prove the eternality of their eternal-unthinkable in contradistinction to the becoming and there
fore the non-eternality of things created, Mahāmati, by the same reasoning (61) I can prove that their eternality has no
reason to be known as such just because things created are non-eternal owing to their becoming.If again, Mahāmati, the 
eternal-unthinkable of the philosophers is in conformity with the idea of a cause, what they regard as characteristic of
a cause is a non-entity like the horns of a hare; and, Mahāmati, their eternal-unthinkable is no more than a verbal dis
crimination, in which, Mahāmati, the philosophers' fault consists.

Why? Because, Mahāmati, mere verbal discriminations are, indeed, the hare's horns, on account of their having no characte
ristic of a self-cause.Mahāmati, moreover, my eternal-unthinkable is really eternal because it finds its cause in the ex
alted state of self-realisation, and because it has nothing to do with a creator, with being and non-being.Its eternalit
y is not derived from the reasoning which is based upon the external notion of being and non-being, of eternity and non-
eternity.If the eternal-unthinkable is eternal in consideration of the non-existence and eternality of external things, 
we can say of this kind of the eternal-unthinkable that the philosophers do not know what is meant by characteristically
self-caused.As they are outside the state of self-realisation attainable by noble wisdom, Mahāmati, their discourse is 
not to the point.XVIII Further, Mahāmati, those who, afraid of sufferings arising from the discrimination of birth-and-d
eath, seek for Nirvāṇa, do not know that birth-and-death and Nirvāṇa are not to be separated the one from the other; and
, seeing that all things subject to discrimination have no reality, imagine that Nirvāṇa consists in the future annihila
tion of the senses and their fields.

