Mahāmati, what is this twofold egolessness? [It is the egolessness of persons and the egolessness of things.What is meant
by egolessness of persons? It means that] in the collection of the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas there is no ego-subst
ance, nor anything belonging to it; the Vijñāna is originated by ignorance, deed, and desire, and keeps up its function 
by grasping objects by means of the sense-organs, such as the eye, etc., and by clinging to them as real; while a world 
of objects and bodies is manifested owing to the discrimination that takes place in the world which is of Mind itself, t
hat is, in the Ālayavijñāna.By reason of the habit-energy stored up by false imagination since beginningless time, this 
world (vishaya) is subject to change and destruction from moment to moment; it is like a river, a seed, a lamp, wind, a 
cloud; [while the Vijñāna itself is] like a monkey who is always restless, like a fly who is ever in search of unclean t
hings and defiled places, like a fire (69) which is never satisfied. Again, it is like a water-drawing wheel or a machin
e, it [i.e., the Vijñāna] goes on rolling the wheel of transmigration, carrying varieties of bodies and forms, resuscita
ting the dead like the demon Vetala, causing the wooden figures to move about as a magician moves them.Mahāmati, a thoro
ugh understanding concerning these phenomena is called comprehending the egolessness of persons.Now, Mahāmati, what is m
eant by the egolessness of things? It is to realise that the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas are characterised with the n
ature of false discrimination.

Mahāmati, since the Skandhas, Dhātus, and Āyatanas are destitute of an ego-substance, being no more than an aggregation o
f the Skandhas, and subject to the conditions of mutual origination which are causally bound up with the string of desir
e and deed; and since thus there is no creating agent in them, Mahāmati, the Skandhas are even destitute of the marks of
individuality and generality; and the ignorant, owing to their erroneous discrimination, imagine here the multiplicity 
of phenomena; the wise, however, do not.Recognising, Mahāmati, that all things are devoid of the Citta, Manas, Manovijñā
na, the five Dharmas, and the [three] Svabhāvas, the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva will well understand what is meant by the eg
olessness of things.Again, Mahāmati, when the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva has a good understanding as regards the egolessness
of things, before long he will attain the first stage [of Bodhisattvahood] when he gets a definite cognition of the ima
geless.When a definite acquisition is obtained regarding the aspect of the stages [of Bodhisattvahood], the Bodhisattva 
will experience joy, and, gradually and successively going up the scale, will reach the ninth stage where his insight is
perfected, and [finally the tenth stage known as] Great Dharmamegha.Establishing himself here, (70) he will be seated i
n the great jewel palace known as “Great Lotus Throne" which is in the shape of a lotus and is adorned with various sort
s of jewels and pearls; he will then acquire and complete a world of Māyā-nature; surrounded by Bodhisattvas of the same
character and anointed like the son of the Cakravarti by the hands of the Buddhas coming from all the Buddha-lands,he w
ill go beyond the last stage of Bodhisattvahood, attain the noble truth of self-realisation, and become a Tathāgata endo
wed with the perfect freedom of the Dharmakaya, because of his insight into the egolessness of things.This, Mahāmati, is
what is meant by the egolessness of all things,and in this you and other Bodhisattva-Mahāsattvas should well exercise y
ourselves.XXV At that time, Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this to the Blessed One:

