IX Then Mahāmati said: Teach me, Blessed One, concerning that most subtle doctrine which explains the Citta, Manas, Manov
ijñāna, the five Dharmas, the Svabhāvas, and the lakṣanas; which is put in practice by the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas; whi
ch is separated from the state of mind which recognises a world as something outside Mind itself; and which, breaking do
wn all the so-called truths established by words and reasonings, constitutes the essence of the teachings of all the Bud
dhas.Pray teach this assembly headed by the Bodhisattvas gathering on Mount Malaya in the city of Laṅkā; teach them rega
rding the Dharmakaya which is praised by the Tathāgatas and which is the realm of (44) the Ālayavijñāna which resembles 
the ocean with its waves.

Then the Blessed One again speaking to Mahāmati the Bodhisattva-Mahāsattva said this: The reasons whereby the eye-conscio
usness arises are four.What are they? They are: (1) The clinging to an external world, not knowing that it is of Mind it
self; (2) The attaching to form and habit-energy accumulated since beginningless time by false reasoning and erroneous v
iews; (3) The self-nature inherent in the Vijñāna; (4) The eagerness for multiple forms and appearances.By these four re
asons, Mahāmati, the waves of the evolving Vijñānas are stirred on the Ālayavijñāna which resembles the waters of a floo
d.The same [can be said of the other sense-consciousnesses] as of the eye-consciousness.This consciousness arises at onc
e or by degrees in every sense-organ including its atoms and pores of the skin; the sense-field is apprehended like a mi
rror reflecting objects, like the ocean swept over by a wind.Mahāmati, similarly the waves of the mind-ocean are stirred
uninterruptedly by the wind of objectivity; cause, deed, and appearance condition one another inseparably; the function
ing Vijñānas and the original Vijñāna are thus inextricably bound-up together; and because the self-nature of form, etc.
, is not comprehended, Mahāmati, the system of the five consciousnesses (Vijñānas) comes to function.Along with this sys
tem of the five Vijñānas, there is what is known as Manovijñāna [i.e., the thinking function of consciousness], whereby 
the objective world is distinguished and individual appearances are distinctly determined, and in this the physical body
has its genesis.But the Manovijñāna and other Vijñānas have no thought that they are mutually conditioned and that they
grow out of their attachment to the discrimination which is applied to the projections of Mind itself.

Thus the Vijñānas go on functioning mutually related in a most intimate manner and discriminating a world of representati
ons.(45) As the Vijñānas thus go on functioning [without being conscious of their own doings], so the Yogins while enter
ing upon a state of tranquillisation (Samāpatti) are not aware of the workings of the subtle habit-energy [or memory] wi
thin themselves;for they think that they would enter upon a state of tranquillisation by extinguishing the Vijñānas.But 
[in fact] they are in this state without extinguishing the Vijñānas which still subsist because the seeds of habit-energ
y have not been extinguished; and [what they imagine to be] an extinction is really the non-functioning of the external 
world to which they are no more attached.So it is, Mahāmati, with the subtle working of the Ālayavijñāna, which, except 
for the Tathāgata and those Bodhisattvas who are established on the stages, is not easy to comprehend; [especially] by t
hose who practise the discipline belonging to the Śrāvakas, Pratyekabuddhas, and philosophers, even with their powers of
Samādhi and transcendental knowledge, it is difficult to distinguish.Only those who, understanding fully all the aspect
s of the different stages of Bodhisattvahood by the aid of their transcendental knowledge, acquiring a definite cognitio
n as regards the meaning of the separate propositions, planting roots of goodness in the Buddha-lands that know no limit
s, and keeping themselves away from the discriminations and false reasonings that arise from recognising an external wor
ld which is of Mind itself, would retire into a secluded abode in the forest and devote themselves to the practice of th
e spiritual discipline, either high, or low, or middling, only those are capable of obtaining an insight into the flowin
g of Mind itself in a world of discrimination, of being baptised by the Buddhas living in the lands without limits, and 
of realising the self-control, powers, psychic faculties, and Samādhis.Surrounded by good friends and the Buddhas, Mahām
ati, they are capable of knowing the Citta, Manas, Manovijñāna, which are the discriminating agents of an external world
whose self-nature is of Mind itself; they are capable of crossing the ocean of birth and death which arises by reason o
f deed, desire, and ignorance.For this reason, Mahāmati, the Yogins ought to exercise themselves in the discipline which
has been given them by their good friends and the Buddhas.

(46) At that time the Blessed One recited the following verses:

